# Phases of an agile projects

## **How the discovery phase works**

Before you start building a service, you need to find out whether users need it and whether other services exist.

This part of your project is called the discovery phase.

You shouldn’t start building your service in discovery.

### **What to find out in discovery**

In the discovery phase you need to understand and map out the user journey.

You should find out:

* who your users are
* your users’ needs and how you’re meeting them, or any needs you’re not meeting
* which services currently meet your users’ needs and whether they’re government services or private sector
* how you’d start developing a new service if your discovery finds there’s a user need for one
* [the people you need on your team](link tbd) for the alpha phase
* what the user journey for someone using your proposed service might look like
* what to [name your proposed service](link tbd)
* how to meet [government accessibility requirements](link tbd)
* how you might build a technical solution given the constraints of your organisation’s legacy systems
* the policy that relates to your service and how it might prevent you from delivering a good service to your users

### **What to do in discovery**

To get the information you need in discovery, you can:

* [carry out user research](link tbd)
* analyse policies, laws and business needs

You shouldn’t use discovery to design a service to work around existing processes in your organisation. Use it to find out whether you can build a service that meets user needs.

### **The team you need**

Find out [how to set up a service team at each phase](link tbd).

### **How long discovery takes**

Every service is different, but depending on the size and complexity of your service, your discovery should usually take between 4 and 8 weeks.

During the final week you should:

* make a broad scope for your project
* [write user stories](link tbd)
* decide the features your ‘minimum viable product’ must have

A minimum viable product is a version of your service that has just enough features for you to test it with users and check whether those features work.

### **How you know discovery is finished**

Discovery is finished when you know:

* the scope of the service you want to build
* whether to move into the alpha phase
* the team of people you need if you do move on to alpha
* that senior stakeholders want to begin building the service and understand your plans
* how you’ll [measure success](link tbd) and what a successful service would look like
* any related services that exist to meet the user need and whether they’re run by government or third parties - your service shouldn’t be duplicating another government service and it should only meet needs government is uniquely positioned to deliver
* how [impairments might affect your users](link tbd) - for example, visual, hearing, motor and cognitive (memory and thinking) impairments
* how many of your users need [assisted digital support](link tbd) and what their needs are

You should have:

* a prioritised list of [user needs](link tbd)
* a prioritised list of [user stories](link tbd)
* a list of stakeholders, and information you’ve got from them about existing services

### **Moving on to the alpha phase**

You should move on to the alpha phase if your discovery findings show:
* you can build a service that better meets user needs compared to what’s currently available
* the service you’re building will be better value for money

### **Stopping after discovery**

Your findings may show it’s best to stop developing your service, for example if you discover:

* there’s no user need for the service you planned to build or for an online service
* user needs are already being met by another service
* technology or policy constraints mean you won’t be able to build a service that meets the user needs you’ve found
* it’s not cost-effective to develop the service

It’s not a failure to stop developing a service after the discovery phase if your findings show that’s the best thing to do.

## **How the alpha phase works**

Alpha is the development phase that comes after discovery.

In the alpha phase you need to:

* build prototypes of your service
* test your prototypes with users
* demonstrate that the service you want to build is technically possible

You should use your experience building prototypes in the alpha to:

* find the problems with the design of your service and decide how you’ll solve them
* make some estimates about how much your service will cost
* identify the biggest risks for the beta stage, as early as possible

By the end of alpha you should know:

* whether to move your service into the beta phase
* what you need to build in beta if you are moving into beta

### **The team you need in alpha**

Find out [how to set up your service team at each phase](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/the-team/set-up-a-service-team#the-service-team-you-need-in-each-phase).

### **How your team should work**

Your team should [work in an agile way](link tbd), iterating quickly so that you can learn quickly.

### **Stages of a successful alpha**

Each alpha will be different because the risks and goals for each service are different.

Most alphas are 8 weeks long and follow these 3 stages.

1. Inception: getting the team together to set out goals.
2. Iterations: build prototypes, test them, learn, change and test again.
3. Conclusion: you move on to the beta phase or end the project.

### **Inception**

At the inception stage, you need to complete these steps, which should take a few days.

1. Bring the team together.
2. Set some goals for your project.
3. Identify the biggest risks.

#### **Bring the team together**

You can hold sessions during inception to make sure your team:

* gets to know each other and forms a team identity
* forms a team understanding of the business itself

You may want to introduce your team to the [Digital Service Standard](https://ontario.ca/digitalstandard), if they aren’t familiar with it, and to agile ways of working.

#### **Set goals**

You and your team must work out what the goals of your alpha are.

For example, some of your goals might be:

* creating a new digital service
* creating a service that meets user needs
* proving that you can serve user needs that are currently being met by the private sector, due to a government service failing

#### **Identify the biggest risks**

The reason for running an alpha is to identify all the risks to your project as early as possible.

During inception you should try to identify the biggest risks and get a better understanding of them.

#### **Types of risk**

In most government projects, the risks fall into one of the following 3 categories:

* design
* business process
* technical

#### **Design risks**

Design risks are any issues that come with running a user-centred design process within an iterative model.

It can often take several attempts to get a scope for your service that’s right for the user.

You need to consider:

* how easy is it to use
* whether the user will get through it correctly the first time
* what errors look like
* how you’ll analyse the user research
* how you’ll build prototypes quickly

#### **Business process risks**

Business process risks could include:

* how your department will integrate your new service
* whether your department has fraud checks
* whether your department is set up to handle support calls
* how to operate the service and who’s responsible if it goes down and whether you have out-of-hours support

#### **Technical risks**

Technical risks tend to be about integrating into the existing systems, for example:

* the type of ongoing connections that are necessary between your service and your department’s existing systems
* any special hosting arrangements, for example high security hosting

#### **What you need at the end of inception**

Every service is different, but by the end of inception your team should have some or all of the following:

* knowledge of the service, what it does and who it’s for
* written descriptions of the people who’ll use the service, also called ‘user personas’
* a good understanding of whatever currently exists to meet the user need
* a good understanding of how to meet [government accessibility requirements](link tbd)
* a clear set of goals and risks
* an idea of the vision for your project and what it should look like when it’s done
* a clear understanding of how the service will integrate or move away from legacy systems
* a prioritised backlog of work for your first iteration

#### **Demonstration and retrospective**

You should show what you’ve learned to the service team and to your stakeholders (the project board or senior management team).

You should also [hold a retrospective meeting](link tbd) at the end of the inception stage.

### **Iterations**

At the alpha stage, you won’t usually be able to choose a single user journey or design. You should build and test many prototypes instead.

This allows you to quickly find out which designs offer the best user experience. Your first draft of a user flow will have problems - keep revisiting the design, research and test processes and improving them.

[Learn more about doing user research in alpha](link tbd).

#### **An example iteration timetable**

Day 1:

* retrospective (1 hour)
* iteration planning (2 hours)
* start iteration

Day 2:

* user research on previous iterations’ prototypes
* analysis of test results

Day 5:

* demo

You can deviate from this timetable but you should do the user research early in the iteration to give plenty of time to feed into the next iteration. This allows fast turnaround of user stories.

Working at this pace will result in:

* user research in iteration 1
* stories completed in iteration 2
* further research on updated prototypes in iteration 3

To work in this way you need well-developed prototypes. These can have backend systems that mock out service integrations, but which contain actual working logic.

If you need to iterate faster, you can start with much lower fidelity prototypes (like paper).

This allows you to test various flows and allow much faster iteration of research and prototype development.

You should keep iterating until either:

* you can demonstrate that you’ve met the user need with the prototypes and are ready to move on
* you’ve proven that you don’t understand the problem enough to prototype, and you cancel the project and return to discovery

#### **At the end of each iteration**

At the end of each iteration you should do a demonstration of the service journey so far which shows what your team has learned and what you’re planning to do next.

You should avoid setting up iterations that begin on Mondays and end on Fridays, since more people are absent on these days.

### **Conclusion**

#### **Deciding the alpha phase is finished**

At the end of the alpha phase, you should have:

* user stories - they should relate to the overall user journey rather than being tied to individual features
* a plan for your beta phase and a (less detailed) plan for your live phase
* set some metrics to [measure your service’s success](link tbd)
* a basic working system with limited functionality which you can demonstrate to users
* an understanding of legacy systems you need to replace or integrate with
* a decision on whether or not to progress to beta phase
* an understanding of how to [design an accessible service](link tbd)
* analysis on the user needs research you’ve done
* ideas for how you’ll [design the assisted digital support model](link tbd) for your service

### **How your prototype should look**

Your alpha prototype needs to allow a complete end-to-end transaction.

You should think of it as a proof of concept and use it to check:

* you’ve got the right solution that meets the user need
* your approach is viable and cost-effective
* the technologies exist to implement your plan
* the things that won’t be easy to change and whether you can still go ahead despite these
* you understand the needs of your users enough to be able to meet them

If not, find out more and make a new prototype.

#### **Moving on to beta**

Your team should feel confident that you aren’t proposing a project that won’t work at beta. Make sure your timelines, your scope and your vision are correct according to the money and people you’ve got for the next phase.

Once you’re confident that you want to move to beta, the delivery manager and service owner should start working on a business proposal for beta, early in the alpha stage.

Starting early on the beta program proposal means your team can keep up momentum, and gives you time to get further spend control approval.

You should hold a final demo of your alpha and make sure the project board or senior management team for your service can attend.

Use the demo to show what you’ve achieved in alpha and explain your vision for the beta phase.

You should have a final retrospective and make a backlog of epic user stories for the beta.

[Find out more about user stories](link tbd).

#### **Deciding not to move on to beta**

You may also use the alpha stage to decide to end your project rather than continuing into beta.

For example, you may find that:

* the user needs for the service are already being met by another government service or the private sector
* it costs too much to build the service based on the number of people who’ll use it
* there’s a better non-digital solution
* adapting or developing another service is a better solution

It’s still a successful alpha if you decide not to move on to beta because it means you won’t waste time and money.

#### **Deciding to start a new alpha**

At the end of alpha, you could also decide to start alpha or discovery again, perhaps because you want to focus on different things.

For example, you might identify a user need in discovery and alpha and then discover a different user need through further research.

## **How the beta phase works**

The objective of the beta phase is to build a working version of the service based on your alpha prototypes.

The version you build must be able to handle real transactions and work at scale.

You also need to keep improving your service and replace existing services or integrate with them.

### **What to do in beta**

You need to do the following in the beta phase:

* improve your service by [testing it with users](link tbd) based on the user stories you created in the alpha phase
* solve any technical or process-related challenges so that your service meets the [Digital Service Standard](link tbd)
* [get the service accredited](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/making-software/information-security) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* make a plan for the launch of your service ([get a GOV.UK domain name and start and end pages](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/get-a-domain-name) and arrange SSL certificates)**NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* release updates and improvements into the development environment
* measure the effect of any changes to the [Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)](link tbd) you established in discovery and alpha, for example if you changed KPIs because of new data
* carry out [regular accessibility testing](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/testing-for-accessibility) and get an [accessibility audit](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/helping-people-to-use-your-service/making-your-service-accessible-an-introduction#getting-an-accessibility-audit)**NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* test the assisted digital support model you designed for your service

### **The team you need in beta**

[Find out the team you need in beta](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/the-team/set-up-a-service-team#the-service-team-you-need-in-each-phase).**NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**

### **Launching your service in beta**

You must launch your service in private beta before you launch it in public beta.

#### **Private beta**

A private beta is a beta that isn’t open to everyone. You must restrict access. Don’t launch your service publicly in private beta - make it invite-only or launch it in a limited region.

A private beta allows you to:

* have more control over the type of user that gets to use the beta
* restrict the volume of transactions that go through the beta
* start small and get quick feedback before rolling your service out to a wider audience

#### **Public beta**

A public beta is a version of your service that’s available for any member of the public to use.

You must pass your beta [service assessment](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/service-assessments/how-service-assessments-work) before you launch your service into public beta.

### **How long the beta phase takes**

The length of time your beta takes depends on the scope of your project, but if you’ve got the right team in place it shouldn’t take more than a few months.

### **When you’re ready to move on to live**

After the release of your beta, you need to keep iterating and improving your service.

Your service is ready to move on to the live stage when you’re sure:

* it meets and can continue to meet the Digital Service Standard
* you can support it and you’ll be able to keep iterating and improving it until it’s retired

### **What you need by the end of beta**

At the end of the beta phase, you should have:

* launched a private beta followed by a public end-to-end beta prototype
* made a prioritised list of the work you need to do (a backlog)
* made an ongoing plan for user research
* found a way to [measure your service’s success](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/measuring-success/using-data-to-improve-your-service-an-introduction) using new data you’ve got during the beta phase **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* evidence that your service meets [government accessibility requirements](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/helping-people-to-use-your-service/making-your-service-accessible-an-introduction#meeting-government-accessibility-requirements) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* tested the way you’ve designed [assisted digital support](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/helping-people-to-use-your-service/designing-assisted-digital) for your service **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* built a working service that can be used in full by users

## How the live phase works

The live phase is the time to keep improving your service based on:

* user feedback
* analytics
* your ongoing user research

### **Before you go live**

Before you can make your service live, you must make sure:

* the service meets the user needs you found in your discovery, alpha and beta phases
* you’re [securing the service’s information](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/securing-your-information) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* you’ve set up your analytics to accurately [measure the success of your service](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/measuring-success) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* you’ve got a plan for the transition or integration of any existing services that meet a similar user need to yours
* the service fully meets the [Digital Service Standard](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/digital-by-default) and can continue to do so
* the service meets [government accessibility requirements](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/helping-people-to-use-your-service/making-your-service-accessible-an-introduction#meeting-government-accessibility-requirements)
* you can support the service and you’ll be able to keep iterating it and improving it until it’s retired

### **The team you need in live**

You should know the roles you need to run your service, based on your experience of building it.

Don’t disband your service team, or hand the service over to a ‘business as usual’ team that won’t keep iterating and improving it.

As you iterate and improve different parts of your service, you may find the team size changes along with your need for specialist roles.

Find out more about [the team you need in the live phase](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/the-team/set-up-a-service-team#the-service-team-you-need-in-each-phase).**NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**

### **After you go live**

After you move to the live phase you should keep improving your service based on user feedback, analytics and further user research.

You should also:

* [continue doing user research](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/user-research/user-research-in-live) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* [monitor the status of your service](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/monitoring-the-status-of-your-service) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* [maintain uptime and availability](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/uptime-and-availability-keeping-your-service-online) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* [practise vulnerability and penetration testing](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/vulnerability-and-penetration-testing) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* [test your service’s performance](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/test-your-services-performance) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* [test new features to make sure they’re accessible](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/testing-for-accessibility) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**
* [maintain quality assurance](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/quality-assurance-testing-your-service-regularly) **NOTE NEED TO THINK THIS ONE THROUGH FOR ONTARIO - LEAVING GDS LINK FOR EVALUATION**

You should repeat the development phases (discovery, alpha, beta and live) for smaller pieces of work as your service continues running.

Keep finding things that need improvement, do research to get the best solutions, iterate, then release.

## **Retiring your service**

Your service may eventually need to be retired, for example if policies change or if there’s evidence that users’ needs have changed.

When retiring a service you should consider user needs in the same way you did when you built the service.

### **Consider user needs**

You need to consider how the user need your service met will be met after your service is retired.

It might be the case that:

* the user need no longer exists
* a new government service will meet the user need
* the user need will no longer be met by government

#### **If a user need no longer exists**

In some cases, policy could change to mean that your service is obsolete, for example when Universal Credit replaced 6 other benefits.

#### **If a new service will meet the need**

If a new government service or services will meet the user need then you should work with those services’ teams.

Share your experiences, findings and knowledge of the user with them so that they can learn from them.

This means you can understand how you’ll support your users through the transition, for example by:

* making sure the new service meets proven user needs
* helping users to find out about the new services in the best way

#### **If the need will no longer be met by government**

If the needs will no longer be met by government but by the private or voluntary sectors then you must:

* share knowledge and insight with these organisations, like open source elements
* help the private or voluntary team use the knowledge or information you share
* make sure that users who would normally go to GOV.UK are sent to the new service in the best way possible

### **Telling your users**

#### **Users who access your service**

The vast majority of people who use your service will begin and end their journeys on Ontario.ca.

As soon as you know that your service is likely to be retired you should email the Ontario.ca team at **EMAIL/Contact TBD** to make sure that those journeys are amended and appropriate information is supplied.

You need to tell the Ontario Digital Service team why you’re retiring the service and how its user needs will be met, so that they can help users with information and links.

#### **Users who access your service directly**

Retiring the service means a significant change for users, but you should try to minimise it by telling them:

* what’s changing and why
* what they’ll have to do to continue to have their needs met in future
* what will happen to their data, whether you’re passing it on to another service and the rights they have under your organisation’s data protection policy

You can tell people using a notification system if your service has one, otherwise use an Ontario.ca content page.

#### **Users who access your service using APIs**

You need to give users who access your service via an application programming interface (API) the time to update their software to use the replacement service’s APIs or make other adjustments.

Contact these users as soon as possible. Keep in mind that they may have significant lead times for making and distributing changes.

#### **Users who access your service with assisted digital support**

You must tell users who don’t use the digital service or use it with assisted digital support that the service is being retired.

To do this, use your service’s assisted digital channel and assisted digital support organisations.

You may need to carry out user research to decide the best way to tell users the service is retiring.

You could use existing research or talk to teams who’ve retired other services that have similar users and use their research.

You may need to make sure that contact centres used by your users tell them the service has been retired and about any replacement service.

You could also put up posters in places that users are likely to visit (for example, in airports for visa or passport services).

### **Make a plan to redirect traffic**

Once the ontario.ca content team updates Ontario.ca to say that your service has retired, the majority of users will be directed to the new service.

Some users will still try to access the service at the retired web address.

You should have a plan for redirecting those users to the new service, or telling them that the service that has permanently retired.

#### **Make sure your subdomain continues to work**

After your service is retired, you must help users by:

* continuing to use SSL
* serving a redirect from your service to the ontario.ca start page

If your service has been live for less than 6 months, you must do this until a year after your service went live.

If your service has been live for longer than 6 months, you must do this for a year after the time it retired or until the current SSL certificate expires, whichever comes first.

Your Ontario.ca start page will be changed to explain that the service is no longer running, and the start button will be removed.

### **Protecting information**

You should have a plan for [securing the information](link tbd) you’ve got about your users.

You should already have policies in place to manage that data responsibly, including details of how long it’ll be retained.

You must make sure that there’s support in place to maintain these policies and protect information.

If you’re giving data to a new service owner, you must:

* do so in line with your organisation’s data protection policies
* tell your users
